Linux+
Cap01 - Preparing your Environment - 31mar-31mar

Verificar este endereco
www.chriswatterston.com/blog/my-there-is-no-cloud-sticker

+ Updating software on CentOS
# sudo yum update

+Updating software on Ubuntu
$ sudo apt-get update
$ sudo apt-get upgrade

+Updating software on openSuse
$ sudo zypper patch

+Updating software on Fedora
$ sudo su -c 'dnf upgrade'
$ sudo su -c 'dnf upgrade -refresh'

Cap02 - Sifiting Through Services - 31mar-xxxx

Launching Services on Linux

1. Background process, running at all times listening for requests --> Daemon
2. Process spawned by a parent program that listens for the requestes

Linux daemon programs often end with the letter d to indicate they're daemon processes
Super-servers are programs that listen for network connections for several different
applications.
The original super-server program created for Linux was the internet daemon ( inetd)
application. The inetd program runs as a daemon, listening for specifi c requests from
clients, and launches the appropriate service program when needed. The inetd program
uses the /etc/inetd.conf confi guration fi le to allow you to defi ne the services for which it
handles requests.
The extended internet daemon (xinetd) application is an advanced version of inetd . It
too launches service programs as requested by clients, but it contains additional features

Serving the Basics

Web Services
    The Apache Server 
        The Apache web server has become popular due to its modularity. Each advanced feature
of the Apache server is built as a plug-in module

    The xginX Server (engine-X)
        designed as an advanced replacement for the Apache web
server, improving on performance and providing some additional features, such as working
as a web proxy, mail proxy, web page cache, and even load-balancing server.
        has a smaller memory footprint than the larger Apache program,
making it ideal for high-volume environments. It’s capable of handling over 10,000
simultaneous network client connections

    The lighthttpd Package
        low memory usage and low CPU usage, making it ideal for smaller server applications, such as in embedded systems.
        it also incorporates a built-in database, allowing you to combine basic web and database services in a single package.

Databese Services

    The PostgreSQL Server
        Standard ACID(Atomicity, consistency, isolation,durability)
        Versatility and complexity

    The MySQL Server
        Utilizing the faster storage engine

    The MongoDB Server
        NoSQL database
        Store data as individual documents, records jSON elements
        Supports many relational database features, such as indexes, queries, replication, and even load balancing

Email Services

    the linux email server is normally divided into three separate functions

    1. The mail transfer agent (MTA)
        is responsible for handling both incoming and outgoing email messages on the server
            1.1 Sendmail -- very complex to configure correctly
            1.2 Postfix -- modular application, simplicity
            1.3 Exim -- 
    2. The mail delivery agent (MDA)
        The MDA program receives messages destined for local users from the MTA program and then determines how those messages are to be delivered. Messages can be delivered directly to the
local user account or to an alternate location defined by the user, often by incorporating filters.
            2.1 Binmail -- most popular, simplicity
            2.2 Procmail -- 
    3. The mail user agent (MUA)
        is the program that interacts with end users, usually run in the client side

Serving Local Networks

File servers
The are two basics methods for sharing files in a local network environments
    Peer-to-Peer -- one workstation enables another workstation to access files stored locally on its hard drive. Ideal for two people
    Client/Server -- utilizes a centralized file server for sharing files that multiple clients can access and modify as needed

In the Linux world, there are two common server software packages used for sharing files:

    NFS ( Network File System) -- is a protocol used to share folders
    SMB ( System Message Block) - windows protocol. the Samba software package was created to allow Linux systems to interact with Win Clients and servers

Print servers
The standard Linux print sharing is called CUPS (Common Unix Printing System)
The Key to CUPS is the printer drivers
For connecting to network printers, CUPS uses the Internet Printing Protocol (IPP)

....86/926 -- 31mar

Cap03 - Managing Files, Directories, and Text

Viewing and Creating Files

List command
$ls [OPTION]..[FILE]..

Present working Diretory
$pwd

alias 

Create empty files
$touch arq1.txt arq2.txt

Create Directories
$mkdir dir1


Copying and moving files

Copy
$cp [OPTION]... SOURCE DEST 

Move or rename a file or directory locally
$mv [OPTION]... SOURCE DEST

For lightning-fast copies of big files or when you are copying large groups os files, we can use remote sync utility
$rsync [OPTION]... SOURCE DEST

Removing files
$rm [OPTION]... FILE
$rm -rv [files]


Linking Files and Directories
There are two types of links
    -- symbolic link - called a soft link
    -- hard link

Establishing a Hard Link
is a file or directory that has onde index(inode) number but at least two diferent file names.
Thus, the file has two names but is physically onde file.
A hard link allows you to have a pseudo-copy os a file without truly copying its data.
This is often used in file backups where not enough filesystem space exists to bak up the file's data.

To create Hard Link
$ln file1 file2

To remove the linked file
$unlink

Constructing a Soft Link
To create a symbolic link
$ ln -s file1 file2



Cap04 - Searching and Analyzing Text - 07abr-**

Processing Text Files

Filtering Text

cut utility
$cut OPTION.. FILE..

$grep

Formatting Text
sort utility
$sort OPTION.. FILE..

$pr

$printf

